LEARNING NEW SPELLS

Learning a new spell college costs 6000 gold coins.
Learning a new spell in a college costs 2000 gold coins.

When a Spellcasting Hero (Wizard, Elf, etc) learns this spell college, print him off a spell list card.  He should write his name on the line.  Several spells are automatically learned with the college.  The rest are listed with boxes beside their names.  When he learns the spell a check should be placed in the box.  Spells must be learned in the order that they are printed on the list.

DEFINITIONS


1. Combat Phase - When a monster is in the same room or corridor as the Hero, or in line of sight, that Hero enters the Combat Phase. The Combat Phase is made up of Combat Turns where the Hero attacks monsters and defends against their attacks. The Combat Phase ends when monsters are no longer in the same room or corridor as the Hero, or no longer in line of sight. If the Heroes are moving together as a group and one Hero enters Combat Phase, then all do, even if some or all of the other Heroes do not meet the criteria for Combat Phase stated above. If the Heroes are separate and one Hero enters Combat Phase, the others do not automatically do so. The Game Master is the final authority on when a Hero enters Combat Phase.

2.  Combat Turn - a turn during Combat Phase.

3. Exploration Phase - When a Hero is not in Combat Phase he is in Exploration Phase. Exploration Phase is made up of Exploration Turns where the Heroes search, open doors, find treasure, and so on. No monsters are in the same room or corridor as the Hero, or in his line of sight, when that Hero is in Exploration Phase. Some spells take monsters out of combat and do not allow Heroes to attack them. These monsters should not be counted when determining if a Hero enters Exploration Phase. If the Heroes are moving together as a group, they all enter Exploration Phase and Combat Phase together. Once again, the Game Master is the final authority on when Heroes enter Exploration Phase.

4.  Exploration Turn - a turn during Exploration Phase.

5. Animals - Animals are all non-humanoid or non-magical monsters found in a quest. Bats, Rats, Spiders, and Wolves are all animals.

6. Beasts - Beasts are all monsters that are part human, part animal, or animal-like humanoids. Skaven, Minotaurs, Beastmen, and Were-beasts are all Beasts.

7. Henchmen - Henchmen are characters that agree to help the Hero in his adventuring. Henchmen run the gamut from paid mercenaries to loyal sidekicks.  Any spell that can be cast on a Hero can be cast upon a Henchman.

8.  Adjacent Squares - A square is considered adjacent to another if it is touching it.  This includes diagonals unless specifically stated otherwise.

9.  Undead - the Undead are monsters like Mummies, Skeletons, Zombies, Ghouls, and Liches.  A dead human or monster brought back to life.

10.  Fearsome Monsters and Heroes - Fearsome monsters are listed as such on their monster cards.  Some spells allow Heroes to become Fearsome.  In such cases anytime a monster starts its turn in the same room as a Fearsome Hero, it must make a 'Fear' roll at the start of its turn.  The monster rolls 1 red die, and on a roll of 5-6 he has become afraid and must move as far as possible from the Fearsome Hero, even if it means leaving the room.  The monster may not make any attack that turn but can defend.  If a monster enters a room with a Fearsome Hero during its movement turn, it must make a Fear roll immediately.  The fear only lasts one turn, but the monster must make a fear roll every turn it is in the same room as a Fearsome Hero.  Once a monster has passed a fear roll, it does not have to make a Fear roll again that turn, but must on the next if it is still in contact with a Fearsome Hero.

11.  Invulnerable Monster - An Invulnerable Monster is immune to the attacks of any non-magical weapon.  Only artifacts and spells may harm these monsters.  These monsters are designated as such on their monster cards.

12.  Regenerate - A monster with this ability regains one lost Body Point per turn.  If the monster is at its full Body Point count, it does not gain any until it lost one.  A monster that loses all its Body Points is dead - it does not regain a Body Point on its next turn.  These monsters are designated as such on their monster cards.  Some spells allow Heroes to regenerate Body Points.  The same rules apply to Heroes as does monsters.



PRINTING THE CARDS

The spell cards come with both a front and a back.  You should print these out, then fold them in half.  Stick a thin sheet of cardboard or posterboard in between the halves, then glue them together.  Cut off the excess white space.


OPTIONAL SPELL RULES YOU MAY WISH TO USE

A Wizard may cast an extra spell for every two Mind Points he gains through training (raising a statistic can be done in between quests at the cost of 2000 gold coins). An Elf may cast an extra spell for every four Mind Points he gains through training. The Wizard starts off knowing 12 spells and the Elf knows 4.


The Wizard chooses four spells from any of the colleges that he knows. The spells do not have to be from the same college. The Elf then chooses all of his spells from any of the colleges he knows; once again the spells do not have to be from the same college. Finally the Wizard chooses the rest of his spells.


Print two full sets of each of the spell cards from the colleges. This would allow the Wizard and the Elf to choose the same spell during a quest.


Allow a Wizard to choose a college.  He may only learn the spells in that college.  Like normal, he only knows the three or four spells that are initially given to him when he starts in a college, and must pay to learn more.  He casts his normal number of spells, but may choose multiples copies of any spell that he knows.
